docs: Upgrade 19 notice — SCR fix, component versions, gas-limit action, prestate TBD (#21544)
ethereum-optimism/optimism: docs/public-docs/notices/upgrade-19.mdx

  * `op-node`: [`--network <network>`](/node-operators/reference/op-node-config#network) (e.g. `--network soneium-mainnet`, `--network op-sepolia`)
  * `op-reth`: [`--chain <network>`](/node-operators/reference/op-reth-config#chain) (e.g. `--chain soneium`, `--chain unichain`)

  **OP Sepolia:**
  Due to a bug in op-reth, the Karst activation timestamp is **not** loaded from the Superchain Registry for `op-sepolia` and `op`. You must configure it manually by providing a genesis file passed via `--chain <path-to-genesis.json>`. Download the pre-built genesis file and pass it directly — do not edit the file.

  * **OP Sepolia**: [Download genesis.json](https://storage.googleapis.com/oplabs-opc-artifacts/chains/op-sepolia/genesis-karst.json)

  <Warning>
    With `op-reth v2.3.1`, the genesis file must **not** include an `osakaTime` field. The pre-built file linked above is compatible with `op-reth v2.3.1` as-is. Both the SCR loading bug and this restriction will be fixed in a following op-reth release so this won't be necessary for OP Mainnet.

>   </Warning>

Reviewer: We should move this context to the release notes for `op-reth v2.3.1` https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/optimism/releases/tag/op-reth%2Fv2.3.1, so it is there for posterity.

Reviewer 2: done

Update the following components:

| Component        | Version      | Notes |
| ---------------- | ------------ | ----- |
| `op-node`        | `v1.19.1`    | Must be updated **prior** to the activation timestamp. Includes the Karst gas limit fix (`keep_karst_upgrade_gas`). Replaces `v1.19.0`, which is now deprecated. |
| `op-reth`        | `v2.3.2`     | Must be updated **prior** to the activation timestamp. Fixes SCR loading for `op-sepolia` and `op-mainnet`. Adds `engine_getPayloadV5` support for Karst. |

> | `kona-node`      | `[TBD]`      | Must be updated **prior** to the activation timestamp. Includes the Karst gas limit fix. Previous version deprecated. |

Reviewer: Soft blocker for the TBD.

Reviewer 2: We didn't have a kona-node version for the Sepolia activation, right? Curious if it was deliberately left out and if so, why we're including it here.

Author: makes sense addressed

| `op-challenger`  | `v1.9.3`     | *(unchanged)* Must be updated **prior** to the upgrade. |
| `op-dispute-mon` | `v1.5.2`     | *(unchanged)* Must be updated **prior** to the upgrade. |
| `op-contracts`   | `v7.0.0`     | *(unchanged)* |
| `rollup-boost`   | `v0.7.16`    | Only if running Flashblocks. Adds `engine_getPayloadV5` support for Karst. Replaces `v0.7.15`. |
| `op-rbuilder`    | `v0.4.9`     | Only if running Flashblocks. Fixes SCR loading for `op-sepolia`/`op-mainnet`. Adds `engine_getPayloadV5` support. Replaces `v0.4.8`. |

<Warning>
  **Upgrade order:** On networks that have **not yet activated Karst** (pre-Karst), `op-node`, `op-reth`, and `op-rbuilder` can be upgraded independently in any order — they will continue using the previous Engine API version until the fork timestamp. On networks that have **already activated Karst** (post-Karst, e.g. Sepolia chains), all three must be upgraded together in a coordinated rollout, as Karst requires `engine_getPayloadV5` and a version mismatch will break the sequencer.
</Warning>

### Gas limit: action required for all chains

> `keep_karst_upgrade_gas = true` is set in the Superchain Registry for **both Sepolia and mainnet** OP Stack chains. This enshrines the one-time Karst upgrade gas into the steady-state block gas limit: after Karst activates, the chain runs with a block gas limit elevated by the Karst upgrade-gas amount above its intended value.

Reviewer: This section is good, but I think we should explicitly name all chains which are affected. The canonical list is here https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/superchain-registry/pull/1259/changes. 

If your chain is getting `keep_upgrade_gas`, then you are getting the enshrinement described here, and you need to consider the "restoring the gas limit" action. Else, the code changes in the latest releases mean that you will not be affected by the bug at all.

If your chain already activated Karst, it _must_ use the `keep_upgrade_gas = true` option.

Update the following components:

| Component        | Version      | Notes |
| ---------------- | ------------ | ----- |
| `op-node`        | `v1.19.1`    | Must be updated **prior** to the activation timestamp. Includes the Karst gas limit fix (`keep_karst_upgrade_gas`). Replaces `v1.19.0`, which is now deprecated. |

> | `op-reth`        | `v2.3.2`     | Must be updated **prior** to the activation timestamp. Fixes SCR loading for `op-sepolia` and `op-mainnet`. Adds `engine_getPayloadV5` support for Karst. |

Reviewer 2: Previous version of op-reth should also be considered deprecated.

Author: addresed

| `kona-node`      | `[TBD]`      | Must be updated **prior** to the activation timestamp. Includes the Karst gas limit fix. Previous version deprecated. |
| `op-challenger`  | `v1.9.3`     | *(unchanged)* Must be updated **prior** to the upgrade. |
| `op-dispute-mon` | `v1.5.2`     | *(unchanged)* Must be updated **prior** to the upgrade. |
| `op-contracts`   | `v7.0.0`     | *(unchanged)* |
| `rollup-boost`   | `v0.7.16`    | Only if running Flashblocks. Adds `engine_getPayloadV5` support for Karst. Replaces `v0.7.15`. |
| `op-rbuilder`    | `v0.4.9`     | Only if running Flashblocks. Fixes SCR loading for `op-sepolia`/`op-mainnet`. Adds `engine_getPayloadV5` support. Replaces `v0.4.8`. |

<Warning>

>   **Upgrade order:** On networks that have **not yet activated Karst** (pre-Karst), `op-node`, `op-reth`, and `op-rbuilder` can be upgraded independently in any order — they will continue using the previous Engine API version until the fork timestamp. On networks that have **already activated Karst** (post-Karst, e.g. Sepolia chains), all three must be upgraded together in a coordinated rollout, as Karst requires `engine_getPayloadV5` and a version mismatch will break the sequencer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  **Upgrade order:** On networks that have **not yet activated Karst** (pre-Karst), `op-node`, `op-reth`, and `op-rbuilder` can be upgraded independently in any order — they will continue using the previous Engine API version until the fork timestamp. On networks that have **already activated Karst** (post-Karst, e.g. Sepolia chains), all three must be upgraded together in a coordinated rollout, as Karst requires `engine_getPayloadV5` and a version mismatch will cause downtime.
```
slightly more specific

</Warning>

### Gas limit: action required for affected chains

* If your chain has `keep_karst_upgrade_gas = true`, the elevated gas limit is enshrined and you must restore your intended limit with a `SystemConfig.setGasLimit()` transaction after activation (see below).
* If your chain does not have the flag, the latest releases mean you are not affected and no action is required.

> * If your chain already activated Karst, it must use `keep_karst_upgrade_gas = true`.

Reviewer 2: > If your chain already activated Karst, it must use `keep_karst_upgrade_gas = true`.

I think it's a bit more nuanced than this. Some chains that haven't activated Karst on mainnet yet will still use this value.

Author: went with a different formulation, can you check @joshklop ?

The chains with `keep_karst_upgrade_gas = true` (the [canonical list](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/superchain-registry/pull/1259/files)) are:

> * **Mainnet:** `OP`, `Ink`, `Metal`, `Mode`, `Soneium`, `Unichain`, `Zora`

Reviewer 2: No Lisk for mainnet? Just checking

Author: Lisk is not part of https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/superchain-registry/pull/1259/changes. Lisk L1PAO is not owned by us, could this be the reason?
cc: @sbvegan

Reviewer 3: I think it was just because their mainnet chain isn't in the registry for whatever reason

Reviewer 2: resolving optimistically

<Steps>
  <Step title="Verify the new kona-client absolute prestate">

  The absolute prestate is generated with `kona-client/[TBD]`. As of Upgrade 19, the `kona-client` source lives inside the [`ethereum-optimism/optimism`](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/optimism) monorepo.

  <Info>
    These hashes will be updated once `op-node/v1.19.1` and the corresponding kona-client release are finalized. The new prestates reflect the `keep_karst_upgrade_gas` chain configuration changes.

>   </Info>

Reviewer: In fact, the `keep_karst_upgrade_gas` changes were made in a way which preserves consensus behaviour for the chains affected by the prestate. The upshot is, there is no new prestate required. So this section can remain as-is.
